---
layout: posts
author: Amy
title: "Sea Ice in the Global Climate System"
---

Finally, a blog post about science! It is rather late, so apologies for that, but it *was* Christmas and I had parties to attend, cricket to be disappointed by, cheese to eat, and darts to watch. I'm here now—let’s see if it was worth the wait.

When I wrote the proposal for my current fellowship, my pitch was that sea ice is a crucial component of the global climate system, one we can understand through the lens of past global change. Given that my expertise lies in dating sedimentary records—which also happen to be our best archives of past sea ice variability—I proposed that by improving our understanding of when sea ice retreated and advanced in the past, we might gain a better grasp of how ongoing sea ice retreat in polar regions both responds to and drives changes in the cryosphere, oceans, and atmosphere.

Sea ice retreat is perhaps one of the most easily observed impacts of anthropogenic climate change. That is not to say that measuring global sea ice is easy—rather, the scale of retreat is vast. In their 2024 update, [Roach and Meier report](https://www.nature.com/articles/s43017-025-00662-1) that global annual mean sea ice reached its second-lowest recorded extent. I am particularly interested in the Arctic, which in 2024 experienced the 6th-lowest September sea ice extent, the lowest December extent, and record regional lows in the Canadian Archipelago and Hudson Bay.

So, why might sea ice matter? Sea ice has been identified by many as a potential “tipping point” in the climate system. I’m not going to go into too much detail here—partly because a great deal has already been written, particularly in [this excellent review by Wunderling and colleagues](https://esd.copernicus.org/articles/15/41/2024/esd-15-41-2024.html), and partly because I’m not convinced the tipping-point framing is always the most useful one.

What is increasingly clear, however, is that sea ice has played a crucial role in the global climate system throughout the past million years or so. My first introduction to sea ice as a key component of our planet’s complex and deeply interconnected climate system came during my PhD, when I was working on ecosystem changes in Greece during the last glacial cycle, from about 50 to 35 thousand years ago. What do sea ice changes have to do with forest composition in the eastern Mediterranean? Quite a lot, actually.

The last glacial cycle—sometimes called Marine Isotope Stage 4 to 2, and often simply “the ice age”—was a long-lived cold period spanning [71 to 14 thousand years ago](https://lorraine-lisiecki.com/stack.html), when the planet was considerably colder. The most obvious evidence of this icy past can be found in places like the British Isles and North America, where the present-day landscape still bears countless clues that these regions were [once buried beneath vast ice sheets](https://shefuni.maps.arcgis.com/apps/webappviewer/index.html?id=fd78b03a74bb477c906c5d4e0ba9abaf).

In the Mediterranean region, far from the margins of these mammoth ice sheets, the climate was similarly cooler (and also drier). Extensive glaciers would have [covered the Pindus Mountains](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S027737912030490X#fig10) in Greece’s Epirus region, for example. The ecosystems responded accordingly. In the foothills of the Pindus Mountains, the [pollen record from the last glacial cycle](https://www.science.org/doi/10.1126/science.1073083)—our best glimpse into what the landscape once looked like—does not include archetypal Mediterranean species such as olive and holly oak. Instead, it is dominated by cold-tolerant trees like pine and spruce, and hardy grasses and asters.

Even more fascinating is that ecosystems were not constant throughout the last glacial cycle. Pollen records alternate between periods dominated by grasses and asters and periods where deciduous trees expanded and thrived. Our best guess is that these changes are [linked to global-scale](https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0277379124002154) climate variations that occur every thousand years or so (with considerable variation in cycle length), known as Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles.

Among the first indicators that the last glacial cycle was not a period of stable cold climate were the earliest Greenland ice cores. Records of [vegetation change from northwest Europe](https://www.nature.com/articles/279759b0) and [temperature records from the North Atlantic](https://ajsonline.org/article/58814.pdf) had long suggested that the transition from the last glacial into our current interglacial (the Holocene) was not a simple, gradual warming but was punctuated by abrupt warmings and coolings. It was the ice cores, however, that captured in full-colour HD the repeated abrupt climatic oscillations that characterise the last glacial cycle. The [stories behind these earliest Greenland ice cores](https://theconversation.com/the-us-army-tried-portable-nuclear-power-at-remote-bases-60-years-ago-it-didnt-go-well-164138) are fascinating and honestly deserve their own blog post—but Cold War history is outside my expertise, so that will have to wait.

The crux of the issue is this: our climate system naturally experienced repeated abrupt warmings and coolings throughout the last glacial cycle. Understanding the drivers and impacts of these natural climate changes provides a laboratory for testing climate models and identifying which components of the climate system respond most rapidly and which have the largest impacts.

For the abrupt Dansgaard–Oeschger warmings, it is becoming increasingly clear that the key to understanding their drivers lies in the Arctic Ocean and nearby seas. While records of past climate change show that sea ice, sea surface temperature, and ocean circulation all varied on thousand-year timescales during the last glacial cycle, the exact processes governing the onset of these warmings and coolings have long remained elusive.

Two major developments in the past decade have changed this—one in our ability to reconstruct past climate, and one in our ability to model it.

**Firstly**, new tools have been developed that allow us to reconstruct past sea ice concentrations with increased accuracy. These have revealed sea ice as an integral feature of millennial-scale climate variability during the last glacial cycle. Research from the Nordic Seas using these tools shows shifts in sea ice cover that would have amplified glacial climate variability in northern high latitudes, contributing to the abrupt, high-amplitude temperature changes over Greenland.

**Secondly**, climate models have begun to reproduce these millennial-scale climate cycles without the need for external forcing. Previously, studies attempting to mimic the abrupt climate changes of the last glacial cycle required modellers to “force” the system—for example, by adding large influxes of freshwater into the North Atlantic. State-of-the-art Earth system models, however, [spontaneously produce self-sustained climate oscillations](https://www.nature.com/articles/s41561-022-00920-7) within a window of glacial-level atmospheric CO₂ concentrations. The timing of these transitions is associated with “temporal variations in the state of the ocean, atmosphere, and sea ice.”

Both the models and the data suggest that Arctic and North Atlantic sea ice governs the duration of Dansgaard–Oeschger cycles. A [modelling study published last year](https://www.tandfonline.com/doi/full/10.1080/29931495.2025.2557072) further suggests that the key mechanism through which sea ice acts as a pacemaker for these cycles is its regulation of changes in North Atlantic ocean circulation.

These same climate changes are closely coupled with the changes I identified during my PhD in a Greek lake, demonstrating that changes in the Arctic can influence climate on a global scale. However, the abrupt warmings that characterise the last glacial cycle are not the best analogues for current climate change. During the last glacial cycle, ice sheets were larger, CO₂ was lower, and the [Earth’s orbit was different](https://science.nasa.gov/science-research/earth-science/milankovitch-orbital-cycles-and-their-role-in-earths-climate/). To understand how ongoing sea ice retreat may drive future climate variability, we must look to past periods when polar temperatures were warmer than today.

The most recent of these is the Last Interglacial (around 129,000 to 116,000 years ago, [Marine Isotope Stage 5e](https://lorraine-lisiecki.com/stack.html)), a period for which abundant evidence exists of a [warm Arctic](https://doi.org/10.1016/j.quascirev.2006.01.033) and a global mean sea-level highstand at least [5 m higher than today](https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aaa4019).

However, we have very few reconstructions of Last Interglacial sea ice and ocean change in the Arctic Ocean and Nordic Seas, largely because of the huge challenges associated with dating marine sediments in the region. Which is where I come in! Where this blog post ends, my project begins. I’ll be focusing on determining when sea ice retreated in the Arctic Ocean by identifying volcanic ash layers within the sediments used to reconstruct past sea ice change.

More on that soon, I hope—but for now, I’ll call it a day.

I'll see you next month.
